Platte Basin Timelapse project
=====
The Platte River, including its North and South forks, provides precious water to major portions of three western states: Nebraska, Colorado and Wyoming. The river as it exists today is the result of geologic processes caused by retreating glaciers 600,000 to 700,000 years ago and, perhaps more importantly, the water management activities of humans that have taken place in the past century. The resulting dams, reservoirs, irrigation canals and power plants were built primarily as a way of promoting agriculture and settlement in arid areas of the basin and to provide for municipal water, power and flood control. As we are now moving further into the 21st century, the Platte River system is serving the growing demands of several competing constituencies: agriculture, municipalities, power generation, recreation and wildlife.

For purposes of this project, the Platte River Basin has been split into five smaller watersheds.

* North Platte watershed
* South Platte watershed
* Central Platte watershed
* The Loops watershed
* Lower Platte watershed

## North Platte – Snowpack, engineering, irrigation, recreation
Water in the Platte Basin starts high in the Rocky Mountains in winter snowpack. Here, a myriad of small mountain streams form during spring melt and runoff, coalescing to create the North Platte River like a piece of frayed rope spread across North Park. This snowpack water flows north into Wyoming where is enters a series of dams and reservoirs used to hold water back for irrigation season, attracting fisherman and recreationists alike. These immense structures have drastically altered the landscape, changing the natural course of the river to suit that of man, generating power and controlling the river’s flow; lingering impacts are felt all the way downstream. Man’s control of the river has made development and settlement possible, rendering a natively inhospitable landscape a profitable, working land of agriculture, ranching, and irrigation.

## South Platte – Inter-continental diversion, urban development, wilderness ‘islands’
South Platte River water is highly spoken for. Early water decisions were made without complete knowledge of how much water actually falls in the Front Range ‘rain shadow.’ The Front Range Urban Corridor, which includes the greater Denver metro, Boulder, Fort Collins, and Colorado Springs, receives little rainfall throughout the year. Fronts, pushed west to east, hit the Rocky Mountains and release moisture on the West Slope, in the Colorado River basin, on the west side of the Continental Divide, which divides the continent into eastern and western flowing rivers. Little water flows east, out toward the growing urban metropolis and the Great Plains. As development continued to expand, eating up native prairie, foothill, and steppe habitat, the natural world remains intact in wilderness ‘islands.’ Today, there are several projects that pump water under the continental divide, from the rather wet, though threatened and over-appropriated Colorado River watershed, to the Front Range. The most known of these is the Colorado Big Thompson project, which delivers water to 33 cities and 650,000 acres of irrigated area.

## Central Platte – Irrigation, endangered species, habitat restoration
The Central Platte Valley, a narrow stretch of the Platte River reaching from the confluence of the North and South Platte rivers to its confluence with the Loup River, is among the most productive and heavily irrigated croplands in the world. In a region where the relationship between surface and ground water is intimate yet difficult to measure and understand, water flows toward cash crops: corn and soybeans. The Central Platte Valley is also a remarkable place for wildlife and native tallgrass prairie, which hosts a variety of epic migrations and resident populations. As agricultural demands have increased, both upstream and in the valley, continued effort has been poured into conservation and restoration of important wetland and river habitats. The presence of endangered species such the whooping crane, piping plover, and least tern has further instigated action from local organizations and the federal government.

## The Loups – Sandhills, ranching, groundwater
The Sandhills region is the largest sand dune ecosystem in the Western Hemisphere and one of the largest stabilized sand dunes in the world. Over the course of many years, mixed grass prairie has stabilized the windblown sand, forming dunes, some over 300 feet in height. Core samples have indicated that the sand dunes have been mobile as little as 1000 years ago during the Medieval Warm Period when warming temperatures and drought spread across the landscape. Today, a strong ranching community utilize the grass stabilized dunes, though risk of overgrazing, drought, and climate change are constant threats to the fragile ecosystem and soils. Water is important in the Sandhills not only as providing livelihood for ranching cattle/bison and families but as an interaction between ground and surface. The Ogallala Aquifer bubbles to the surface in springs throughout the Sandhills, creating tributaries and three branches of the Loup River complex that flows south and east toward Columbus and the Platte River. The Loup’s groundwater provides a welcome relief for the Platte as it often runs dry in high use times in the Central Platte Valley, making its way toward the Lower Platte’s urban centers and confluence.

## Lower Platte – urban development, journey complete (this is the weakest region in terms of thematic elements)
The Platte River, as it approaches the confluence with the Missouri River south of Omaha, has been through its complete journey, flowing a total of 20,275 river miles with many different straws and sizes of straws dipped into the current. Snowpack, weather and climate, and groundwater have all made contributions; irrigation, recreation, municipal use, and wildlife interest have all made withdrawals. The city of Lincoln, and increasingly West Omaha, make their final draws from well fields near Ashland Nebraska, supplying water for the growing cities. As times progress, these two cities will be increasingly tied to the river, and, at some point, may be bisected by it. It is important we know that the basin’s water unites us all; it is important we know the water’s journey because we owe it that; and it is important we protect it because it provides.

